10 resolutions IT professionals should keep all year
====================================================

By Scott Matteson | January 15, 2018, 5:42 AM PST

Resolutions don't have to start on January 1. You can pick up these habits
at any point to help manage your environment, workload, and career.

January is a time for many to reinvent themselves through the time-honored
tradition of New Year's resolutions. While the optimistic mindset of
"new year, new you" is commendable, quite often these would-be new habits
just don't stick.

Most resolutions like eating healthier, building greater patience, calling
family members more often and such are really things that should be permanent
lifestyle choices, not something to think about each January (and possibly
forget by February). The realm of IT is no exception; properly applying
oneself to the myriad of tasks at hand merely on an annual basis is a recipe
for failure. With that in mind, IT professionals should pledge to stick to
these commitments year-round.

1. Work on your documentation
-----------------------------

I'm going to get this one out of the way up front since it's likely to be
perceived as the least pleasant suggestion. Nobody likes doing documentation,
but the satisfaction when it's completed makes up for the pain.

Just kidding about that line "when it's completed." Documentation is never
completed; it's always in need of an update, a clarification, or a complete
overhaul. Screenshots in particular often require refreshing. Applications,
systems, and networks change continuously and documentation which becomes
irrelevant is worse than no documentation at all, since it can be confusing
or misleading. It's especially important to approach documentation with the
mindset of "what would a lay person need to know to support this particular
piece of technology?"

Some IT professionals feel that documentation can actually work against
them since they believe if they silo complex information within their heads
this will make them indisposable. That may be the case, but it will also
serve as a set of chains, making them the sole point of contact for
supporting the applications/systems involved and can prevent them from
moving up the ladder onto other, better things. Think of documentation as
a ticket to sanity, since it allows others to share responsibilities you
may own and paves a path to freedom.

2. Educate your users
---------------------

Documentation needn't simply apply to internal IT processes or diagrams;
it can also include information and materials helpful for users.

If you work in IT you're likely all too familiar with the concept of
routine, repetitive tasks which can unnecessarily eat away at your day. Prime
example: password resets, which can be a significant time drain. There are
certain strategies which can help users remember their passwords and when
they need changing; password databases like Password Safe and KeePass,
Outlook reminders to change passwords before they expire (such as every
60 days), mnemonic strategies to remember complex passwords, and other tips.
These should be shared along with whatever else may be helpful for them to
use technology to do their jobs.

Educating your users on elements such as these as well as some of the other
tips and tricks you've picked up along the way in your career can both assist
them and reduce your aggravation and workload.

3. Plan ahead
-------------

IT is one of the most event-driven careers one can have. Nothing is
predictable, plans often go awry, emergencies come up at the most
inconvenient times, and both systems and users are always needy.

Each day can be spent dealing with putting out the fires at hand, but that
turns you into a completely reactionary employee, making you less effective
and putting the business at risk. It's critical to regularly sit down and
take some time to map out the weeks and months ahead. Assess your short-term
and long-term priorities in your role and break the latter down into the
former to ensure these are focused on in a timely fashion.

For instance, if you know you need six VMWare ESX servers installed in three
months, scope the project out and break the tasks down to meeting with
stakeholders to evaluate requirements, obtaining vendor quotes for the
hardware/software, lining up the purchases, arranging delivery of the systems,
physical installation of said systems, operating system setup, and virtual
machine deployment. Schedule these tasks over the weeks ahead so you'll be
on target. Oh, and don't forget the documentation!

4. Protect your environment
---------------------------

Patching systems, like writing documentation, is never anyone's idea of a big
party at work, but like all unpleasant obligations it must be done.

More specifically, it must be done regularly. Too many companies ignore
patching duties until a zero-day exploit is announced, and then the
remediation process turns into a convoluted fire drill. Other responsibilities
fall by the wayside in these scenarios, leaving user and system needs
unfulfilled.

Never apply patches manually or even via the basic Windows Update process if
you can avoid it. A centralized patch management mechanism like Microsoft
System Center Configuration Manager, IBM BigFix, Red Hat Satellite or some
other enterprise-level product can help automate the distribution of patches
and provide reporting capabilities as to the success or failure of patching
operations. Let it run and check the results on a daily or weekly basis.

5. Refresh and upgrade
----------------------

Applications and systems are usually upgraded every 2-3 years, in my
experience. New technology helps deliver better performance, additional
features, and greater stability. Furthermore, hardware warranties have a
tendency to expire, usually at the wrong moment, so it's essential to take
the time to figure out how to keep your environment up-to-date. And ensure
you establish the time to follow through.

Don't just focus on product updates, however, but keep an eye on process
updates. If you're using a monitoring solution which has cumbersome background
operations, see if you can streamline or simplify these for better results.
IT strategies which are onerous can sometimes be reduced in size or scope.
Eliminate complexity where possible and offload human responsibilities to
the machines (hint: automation) if you can do so reliably.

6. Network with peers
---------------------

Having a wide and diverse base of peers with whom you interact in technology
can be extraordinarily beneficial since it exposes you to other ideas, habits
and concepts and helps build bridges.

This can be accomplished on a physical face-to-face basis (socializing with
coworkers across different fields, for instance can be incredibly helpful
both to share ideas and build rapport) as well as from a virtual capacity.
Social media such as LinkedIn and Twitter works wonders for networking.
I've come across many interesting tech people just through Twitter alone
and their insights and backgrounds have proven beneficial to expanding
my involvement with and understanding of technology.

7. Obtain training/update skills
--------------------------------

On a similar note to system or application updates, you need to keep your
career updated as well. This can be done via training courses, conferences,
webinars, printed or digital material and email newsletter subscriptions.
It doesn't have to be costly; dedicating a few days a month to simply
reading online articles can be beneficial.

Skills have a tendency to stagnate and even if you consider your position
stable and your responsibilities fairly static in nature, it's impossible
to tell what the future holds. Any one of us working in IT may find
ourselves interviewing for a new job with little notice. It behooves you
to ensure you don't have to "cram" on new technologies to answer interview
questions, when you should be exposed to — or at least familiar with —
these concepts on a regular basis.

8. Branch out into new fields
-----------------------------

Nobody ever said working in IT was easy. In addition to maintaining your
current skill set, try branching out into different fields where possible
in order to broaden your knowledge base and increase your appeal to
potential new employers — or your current one. You might very well find
yourself retained in the face of a potential layoff because you're the
person who knows about [insert hot trend here].

For instance, it's been said that automation can pose a serious threat to
system administrator jobs, and current sysadmins would do well to evolve
into learning coding as well. This may seem unfair on the surface - many
sysadmins would argue if they wanted to become programmers then they would
have done so directly - but it simply goes with the IT territory.

IT is not like finance, HR, law, or some other professional which changes
on a glacial basis; the irony of the field is that we bring about new
changes in rapid fashion... and those changes require us to adjust our
know-how accordingly.

9. Focus on what makes you tick
-------------------------------

Amidst updating your skill sets and focusing on new concepts, don't forget
to retain a focus on what you truly love about technology and what brought
you into the field to begin with in order to keep your perspective fresh.

I myself enjoy troubleshooting and solving the many "mysteries" which can
occur when you work in IT, such as application crashes, disappearing emails,
script failures, and other puzzling developments. This helps me to keep from
feeling agitated when something isn't working right to see myself as a
maintaining order in a chaotic environment.

I also enjoy working with encryption since it can be rewarding when it works
right, and as I indicated earlier, this could lead to a career in cybersecurity
down the road.

10. Exercise/downtime
---------------------

The gyms are packed with people trying to lose a few extra pounds and yet
many of them will likely be gone by March. Since IT is one of the more
stressful careers, 12 months of regular exercise can help you retain your
sanity and focus. Just getting out of the office for an hour at lunchtime
to run a few miles can also produce remarkable insights into existing
problems since you're easing off the throttle and exercise stimulates your
brain.

Downtime is also important. While many of my hobbies involve technology, I
also make sure to branch out into other areas like sports, craft beer,
history and cinema. Spending time with family and friends on a regular
basis is also helpful both from a social perspective as well as to aid in
recharging and broadening your horizons. You might even turn off your phone
for a while!

Take it from me, not being immersed in technology on a constant basis has
helped me maintain my love for the profession for 25 years.
